# Pitfalls of Web3

While Web3 promises a Utopia where everything is decentralised, democratised, and free of all the maladies of Web2, the pitfalls of the movements are becoming apparent.

The fundamental ethos of Web3 is worth fighting for, but the crucial point is in getting it right: immutable code on the blockchain is awesome when goes as planned, not so much when it’s imperfect code acting on an imperfect world. 

This is a research project, a musing more than anything, about  the ways that the whole Web3 movement and its subsidiaries can go wrong, and what can be done to avoid it. This is an invitation to all the actors in Web3, to take a step back and truly appreciate what we’re building, and all the different ways in which it can have an impact on the world at large. This is an urge to think not just of the positive effects, but crucially, the negative ones. If Web3 is so precious, then we should avoid its ruin at all costs.

## The Great Democratisation

Web3 is all about democratising everything: take power from the few mega corporations and governments, and give it back to people. While this is one of the most commendable of pursuits, it has its pitfalls as well.

### Power to the masses?

Web3 has enabled a more inclusive financial infrastructure for sure, but whether it has or will reach true democratisation and decentralisation is a question worth asking: the shadow of Pareto Distribution looms large, where network effects dictate that there will always be only a few winners. While experimentation is crucial for innovation, the Web3 projects that shows signs of success will become more successful: success begets success begets success. 

This leads to a winner-takes-all scenario, which is exactly what we have in Web2 at the moment. While one can say that in Web3 it is not an individual, but a community that owns any given project, it can argued that it is in fact very similar to how publicly traded companies function: no one individual or group of individuals have full ownership, and all the stock holders have a say in the matter. 

### Worst of Both Worlds?

In the current capitalistic economies, startups are the pioneers, the lifeblood for innovation and the harbingers of change. There has been ample enough research on why startups are able to move fast, and stay light in pursuit of disrupting a Goliath. There are only a few people who needs convincing, the roles are more fluid, there is an overall sense of mission, and crucially: there are no earning calls for the public. 

The earning calls are what the big corporations live and die for: it is necessary for the public stock holders to keep track of how their stocks are doing, but it makes life difficult for the employees and kills a good chunk of visionary experimentations that can go beyond a given quarter.

Web3 startups seem to have inherited the worst of both these worlds: they have cash crunch and are under staffed and overworked like a traditional startup, but have the general public looming over them like the Sword of Damocles via token prices. While tokens are a great way to raise funds for a given project and give an early access to the masses for a possible profit, this means that token prices behave almost exactly as stock prices: the stewards of the project must always have their eyes on it, make sure the price doesn’t go down, while guarantying a linear (or better yet, exponential) growth, day after day. While transparency is great, whether this sort of transparency in the initial stages of a startup catastrophically cripples the startup in its capacity to solve the problem at hand is an open question.

### Worst of Both Worlds, 2.0

This one is pretty self-evident: government-issued cryptocurrencies. Money with all the centralisation of a government, with all the programmability of a cryptocurrency. A wet dream for any government that wants to control its citizens.

### Censorship

Censorship is a double-edged sword. In a perfect world, we wouldn’t even be talking about it. But we live in a messy Universe, with messier humans. Censorship is used to control citizens and kill a possible uprising against a regime(zayn, zindagi, azadi), while it is also crucial in keeping the web clean of child pornography, sexual harassments of all kinds, and all the other dirty underbelly of the human experience.

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bDnjiNCtFk4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bDnjiNCtFk4)

While anarchists would love a truly censorship-free Web, the ramifications of such a state of affairs has not been pondered properly. 

### Regulation

Regulation is the second of the double edged swords: too much of it leads to a crippling economy and zero innovation, while the absence of it inevitably gives way to a hijacking of the human biology. 

Just from a marketing perspective, two countries give prime examples: Indonesia still allows cigarette advertisements, and it’s the second largest consumer of the product.

[The Toll of Tobacco in Indonesia](https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/problem/toll-global/asia/indonesia)

Brazil allows for coca-cola advertisements to be placed anywhere and everywhere, and the country is the worst hit in the obesity epidemic, despite still being part of the developing world.

[Brazil's Coke Obsession](https://www.halfwayanywhere.com/south-america/brazil/brazils-coke-obsession/)

Brazil and coca-cola are only part of the fast food problem: the fast food giants of the West are moving to the Global South in search of higher revenues, and making everyone obese and unhealthy.

While these are real world, brick-and-mortar scenarios and examples, it is every bit as crucial for Web3 to ponder these questions as well: especially as it gathers momentum and starts having impacts on the brick-and-mortar aspects of our lives.

### Incentives, Incentives. But short term or long term?

Web3 is all about incentivising certain behaviours and disincentivising others. Sticks and carrots, everywhere. But the donkey’s potential is limited in taking the load. A human on the other hand, is Mother Box of all potentials. 

The crucial thing about incentives is whether we’re doing them right, and right in respect to whom? What of doing hard things that are painful right now? Everything worthwhile in life is a pursuit of delayed gratification, from fitness to relationships to PhDs. We can gamefi them to an extend, but what about building intrinsic motivations? What happens when the carrots are taken away? 

Another important aspect worth considering is the Play2Earn movement. It’s great to have teenagers earn some money themselves playing games(tokenomics willing), but the analogy of daily wage work quickly comes into view: should I go for a menial job now to earn a few bucks, or should I forego that to study and learn better skills that might pay me exponentially better in the future? 

A more alarming analogy would be click farms. Web 2 already has them, and it limits the lives of youngsters in the developing world, not enhance them. Play2Earn has the potential to become the click farm of Web3. 

### The 4-Hour Work Week

The remote-first ethos of Web3 has enabled a lot of Web3 workers to travel and work from anywhere in the world: the popular dream of Timothy Ferris slowly coming true.

But only if you’re from the First World. 

The popular book hides the blatant discrimination in plain sight: get a remote job in the First World where the spending power parity is very high, move to a much cheaper place on the planet where the spending power parity is very low, so all you have to do is work 4 hours a week to live like a Queen(King) there. All good as long the Third World stays poor and hungry.

While the Web3 celebrates democracy and equality and a global community, Web3 workers from the Third World are payed Third World salaries, when their First World counterparts gets to travel the world and develop substantial savings at the same time. This is at a time when we know that the country that you’re born into defines your fate in life, more than anything, and there’s an urge to change that for the better. All lives matter. Presumably.

Real life gatherings within Web3 are very much filtered on where you’re based out of: if you are from Karachi and want travel to New York to attend a conference, you are guilty until proven innocent, and the burden of proof is upon you(the coveted B1B2). Most often than not, you receive the acceptance email from the organisers a week or two prior to the event, by which point the window has already closed for visa procedures. 

Two fun facts:

1. You’re more than twice as likely to survive as a soldier in the front lines of the American Civil War than being born into Somalia today.
2. If you’re on the poverty line in the US, you’re among the richest 14% in the world. Richest 4% if you’re earning median income.

For more on the Open Borders Argument and how it can help everyone involved: 

[Utopia for Realists](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/40876575-utopia-for-realists)

[The Case for Open Borders](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J3JAD_AQOek)

### Demonic Autonomous Organisations?

Decentralised Autonomous Organisations, or DAOs, are heralded as the next big thing in governance of all sorts: for self-governance, powerful organisations, and all sorts of human collectives, at all scales.

While it’s a great thing as long as everything goes well, a DAO is a complex adaptive system. That means that it would evolve over time, through minute steps and a myriad of human interactions, into something new. There are risks of these new entities getting locked into a sub-optimal Nash equilibrium (A Prisoner’s Dilemma), in game theoretic terms. If any of those states become particularly harmful, there are no kill switches.

Tax increase for positive climate action is a good example for another scenario: while carbon emissions need to be taxed more for the benefit of the planet. But individual citizens are highly unlikely to vote for high taxes for themselves.

This shows a systemic issue with DAOs: that by definition, a DAO only executes a popular decision. We know from history that any idea that was worth anything always began as an unpopular idea: that it took a lot of time and effort anything to gain popularity. But sometimes, an institution, or a corporation, needs to implement an unpopular decision to live through the day. In fact, we call those individuals who went through with their decisions as visionaries, but only in hindsight. 

Are we going to lose these visionaries in DAOs? And crucially, does the entity freeze in the moment of a crisis, when there’s a need for quick, possibly unpopular course of action?

### Smart Contracts: the quintessential finite game?

While it’s obvious that smart contracts are a phenomenal technical innovation, it does seem like we’re morphing human interactions into finite games with them. There can only be the scenarios and kinds of interactions that are defined in a smart contract. And the aspect of change is not really built into the philosophy. But the only thing constant in this world is change. 

### The irrational human at the centre of it all

Humans are wonderful creatures: we have collectively built all that we see around us. We’ve come a long way from our cave dwellings, and have conquered the weather and the land and the predators, become the apex species on the planet, and are confidently looking beyond. 

But we also are imperfect creatures. We stumble, we fall, we quibble and quarrel, we do things even we ourselves can’t explain. We’re not Homo Economicus, but irrational, impulsive being who’re struggling to find our way in this world. While its always nice to see ourselves as beautiful, perfect creatures, it’s much more helpful in viewing the species from a bit more cynical standpoint. When building systems that could potentially change the future of humans and in effect all life, it’s better to think of us as imperfect and irrational beings, prone to make mistakes, wondering who will save us from ourselves.

But there will always be a way forward: we’ve come this far, we can go much further. It’s just a matter of not setting ourselves for failure, of being vigilant of our shortcomings, and always looking out for unknown unknowns. Existence is too precious to let our guards down.